
\mychapter{Classical Algebraic Function Theory}

The roots of algebraic geometry lie in studying the zeros of
polynomial equations.  We began with a single polynomial in a single
variable, $\sum a_n x^n = 0$, and have learnt a great deal about
it.  We know how to solve it (at least in terms of radicals) if $n$ is
less than 5, and Galois proved that no such solution exists (in the
general case) for $n$ equal to or greater than 5.  Simple long
division tells us that it can have no more than $n$ roots, i.e, $\sum
a_n x^n = \prod (x-\gamma_n)$, and Gauss showed that if all of the
$a_n$ are complex numbers, then so are all of the $\gamma_n$.

The next logical step is to consider zeros of a single polynomial in
two variables: $\sum a_{ij} x^i y^j = 0$, and this equation has also
received a great deal of attention from mathematicians.  Like the
univariate case, we have theories devoted to low-order special cases
--- {\it linear equations} (all terms first degree or constant), the
{\it conic sections} (all terms second degree or less), and the {\it
elliptic curves} (one term third degree; all others second degree or
less).  In the general case, $\sum a_{ij} x^i y^j = 0$ is called an
{\it algebraic curve}, and a rational function in $x$ and $y$ is
called an {\it algebraic function}.  These will be our main focus of
attention in this chapter.

In this book, our major interest in algebraic curves and functions is
that they provide an elegant way to handle roots in our integrand.
Thus, to integrate something like $\sqrt{x+1}$, we would construct the
algebraic curve $y^2 = x + 1$ and then integrate the algebraic
function $y$.  To carry out this procedure in general, we will need a
fair amount of modern algebraic function theory.  To set the stage for
the modern theory, however, a chapter on classical algebraic function
theory seems to be in order.

\section{Riemann Surfaces and Puiseux Expansions}

The first problem we face when dealing with algebraic curves is the
multi-valued nature of their solutions.  Consider, once again, the
algebraic function $y$ defined on the algebraic curve $y^2 = x + 1$.
There are, in fact, two seperate algebraic functions that solve this
equation --- both $y$ and $-y$ are solutions.  Conventionally, we
express this by writing something like $y = \pm\sqrt{x+1}$, but for
higher degree curves this kind of notation becomes quite unsuitable.
How, for example, do you express the three possible solutions to a
cube root?

Bernhard Riemann's elegant solution to this problem was to regard the
entire algebraic curve as a two-dimensional surface in a
four-dimensional space.  Why four dimensions?  Well, just as in the
univariate case, we find it convenient to work with complex numbers,
so as to deal easily with roots of negative numbers.  Regarding both
$x$ and $y$ as complex numbers (two dimensions each), and plotting
them against each other, we obtain a four dimensional space.  Just as
in the real case, where an equation like $x^2 + y^2 = 1$ defines a
circle, an algebraic curve defines a surface, the loci of $x$ and $y$
that satisfy the defining polynomial, called the curve's {\it Riemann
surface}.  An algebraic curve's Riemann surface is, in fact, a
two-dimensional manifold, as I shall now demonstrate.

The defining polynomial can be regarded as a polynomial in $y$, whose
coefficients are polynomials in $x$, simply by collecting terms with
like powers of $y$.  For any given value of $x$, we have a polynomial
in $y$ with complex coefficients that yields at most $n$ solutions.
We can be more specific.  For any given value of $x$, we have {\it
exactly} $n$ solutions for $y$ {\it unless} one of two things happen.
Either the leading ($y^n$) coefficient is zero, in which case we have
less than $n$ solutions due to having a polynomial of degree less than
$n$, or the polynomial has multiple identical roots.  Any point $x$
that generates exactly $n$ roots of $y$ is called an {\it ordinary}
point of the algebraic curve; any point $x$ that generates less than
$n$ roots, for one of these two reasons, is called a {\it singular}
point of the curve.

Now, the coefficient of $y^n$ in the defining polynomial will be a
polynomial in $x$, which has a finite number of roots at which it is
zero, so there are only a finite number of singular points where the
defining polynomial is of degree less than $n$ in $y$.

Likewise, there are only a finite number of singular points with
multiple identical roots, as can be seen by considering the
discriminant of defining polynomial (Theorem ?), regarded as a
polynomial in $y$, with coefficients in ${\bf C}[x]$.  The
discriminant, as the determinant of a matrix with coefficients in
${\bf C}[x]$, exists itself in ${\bf C}[x]$, and therefore will have
only a finite number of points where it is zero.  Thus, an algebraic
curve has only a finite number of singular points, which can be found
by computing the zeros of simple, univariate polynomials.

\example Find the singular points of $y^2 = x + 1$

We normalize the defining polynomial by writing it as $y^2 - x - 1 =
0$, and begin by noting that the coefficient of $y^2$ is 1, so the
defining polynomial is second degree for all finite values of $x$.
Where does it have multiple roots?  We compute the discriminant:

INSERT DISCRIMINANT HERE

Thus, we conclude that the only singular point of $y^2 = x + 1$ lies at
$x = -1$.

\endexample

Any ordinary point can be expanded using a power series in $(x-\alpha)$.
